# i686-elf-tools
Cross compiling an i386- or i686-elf Win32 toolchain is an outstandingly complicated and painful process. Both Binutils and GCC fail to properly articulate the extent of software dependencies required to build them, resulting in a litany of spurious and confusing error messages being emitted during compilation. Even once you do have the required software dependencies in place, you will still run into roadblocks due to bugs in how GCC performs [canadian cross compilation](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Cross_compiler#Canadian_Cross).

This repo provides a set of precompiled binaries to those who want to use get what they came for and move on (an i686-elf toolchain that, unlike others on the internet, includes cc1 and GDB), as well as a set of instructions for those that would like to build these things themselves. Also featured are a set of instructions for those that wich to install these tools on Mac OS X or Linux.

## Win32
### Tutorial

  By default, `i686-elf-tools.sh` will download GCC 5.3.0, Binutils 2.25 and GDB 7.10. If you would like to change these versions, open the script in your favourite text editor and change the values of `BINUTILS_VERSION`, `GCC_VERSION` and `GDB_VERSION`. Instead of using MinGW32 or MinGW64, [MXE](http://mxe.cc) is used, providing us with an awesome Win32 toolchain that always produces statically linked binaries that just work (and don't need random MinGW DLLs).
  
  Note: if you already have MXE installed, `i686-elf-tools.sh` will not make any attempt to check this, and will automatically download the latest version of MXE to `/opt/mxe` and permanently add another MXE related entry to your `PATH`. Existing MXE users may want to either rename their existing MXE folders to something else, or modify the script so it does not perform any MXE related actions

1. Install a 32-bit (i386) version of Ubuntu. This procedure was performed on top of a Minimal install of Ubuntu 15.10 i386. The Minimal Ubuntu installer can be found [here](https://help.ubuntu.com/community/Installation/MinimalCD). You will need a shell installed in order to run Wine.

2. Download i686-elf-tools.sh to somewhere, e.g. your home directory

3. Make it executable: `chmod +x i686-elf-tools.sh`

4. Run the script: `./i686-elf-tools.sh`

5. If the stars are aligned, everything will go smoothly and after a little while you will have a brand spanking new cross compiler. All required files will automatically be zipped up to an archive `i686-elf-tools.zip` in your home directory. Copy these over to Windows with WinSCP (or your favourite program), unzip, and you should be good to go

6. In the event something does fail, you will need to abort the script (as it performs absolutely zero error checking). You can do this by repeatedly mashing `CTRL+C` until it gives out

## Mac OS X

Installing an i386-elf toolchain on Mac OS X is an outstandingly simple process, compared to Win32

1. Install [Brew](http://brew.sh/)
2. Download the [i386-elf recepies](https://github.com/altkatz/homebrew-gcc_cross_compilers)
3. Copy `i386-elf-binutils.rb`, `i386-elf-gcc.rb` and `i386-elf-gdb.rb` to `/usr/local/Library/Formula`. As these formulae depend on one another, attempting to execute these directly with `brew install i386-elf-gcc.rb`, etc will fail.
4. Run `brew install i386-elf-binutils`, `brew install i386-elf-gcc` and `brew install i386-elf-gdb`

## Linux

Follow the instructions on the [OSDev Wiki](http://wiki.osdev.org/GCC_Cross-Compiler) or simply remove the `--host` argument to binutils, gcc and gdb's configure script in `i686-elf-tools.sh`

## FAQ

### Why would I want to use this?
For building your own [Operating System](http://wiki.osdev.org/Bare_Bones), of course!

### How do I install this onto Windows?
After copying `i686-elf-tools.zip` to your PC, all necessary programs can be found in the `bin` folder. You can then put this folder in your `PATH`, or simply browse to the programs in this folder manually. When running these programs, it is important to make sure the `libexec` folder is next to the `bin` folder. Certain programs (like gcc) depend on the contents of this folder.

Note: the binutils generated by this process do not contain a prefix in their filenames (i686-elf-). As such, if you have other copies of ld, as, etc in your patch this may cause conflicts.

### Why is Wine required for Win32?
When your cross compiler has been generated, GCC's `Makefile` will attempt to extract some information from your new compiler by trying to execute it. As your compiler is not built for the system it is being compiled from (in this case, it is meant for Windows) the step will fail and `make` will be interrupted.

While [some claim](http://permalink.gmane.org/gmane.comp.gcc.cross-compiling/15124) GCC actually creates two compilers during the compile process (one for the build system (your Linux OS), one for the host (Windows)), for me this did not appear to be the case. The workaround therefore is to either perform these steps manually, or update the `Makefile` so it is able to run without error. We do this by installing wine, and then telling the `Makefile` to use Wine to execute the required command.

### Does this include libgcc?
The Win32 procedure does not; as of yet I have been unable to get `make all-target-libgcc` to work properly. I am unable to comment in regards to the Mac OS X and Linux procedures (though I would imagine you should have no troubles on Linux, as you are not targeting Windows)

### Can I use MSYS/MSYS2/MinGW/MinGW/MinGW-w32/MinGW-w64/Cygwin, etc to do this?
No. But you can try. I got all sorts of crazy errors I was simply unable to resolve when I was looking at solutions to compile these tools. I have successfully compiled on Windows in the past, however there have been two issues with this:
* Executables had dependencies on MinGW/Cygwin libraries (most likely as I just didn't know how to statically link)
* GDB would randomly quit whenever I tried to type a command

YMMV.

### Can I use `$DISTRO` instead of Ubuntu?
I originally tried to use CentOS 7 64-bit, however along the way I encountered various issues potentially attributable to bitness, resulting in my switching to a 32-bit OS to simplify troubleshooting. CentOS 7 32-bit _cannot_ be used, as all the packages required by MXE are not available on yum. The ultimate showstopper however was I could not get Wine to execute my cross compiler (see above). Modifying Wine's bitness settings did not appear to resolve this.

If you are determined not to use Ubuntu (or another Debian derivitive), please see the [prerequisites for MXE](http://mxe.cc/#requirements). Note: you may need additional packages to these to successfully compile gcc, e.g. _texinfo_, _readline-devel_, etc. Google any error messages you get to reveal the appropriate package you need to install.

### When running these steps manually and running `make` for binutils I get an error _GCC_NO_EXECUTABLES_
The path to the compiler specified as `--host` to `configure` cannot be found on your `PATH`. Update your `.bashrc` and login/logout.

### When running these steps manually I get _i686-elf-gcc: command not found_
This is caused by two bugs in the GCC Makefile

1. The file `make` is looking for is called `xgcc`, not `i686-elf-gcc`
2. See the section _Why is Wine required for Win32_ above
